1. Key Differences between SQL and NoSQL Databases

SQL (Structured Query Language) databases are relational databases that store data in the form of tables consisting of rows and columns. They follow a fixed schema, meaning the structure of the data must be defined before inserting records. SQL databases support complex queries using joins and ensure strong consistency. Examples include MySQL and PostgreSQL.

On the other hand, NoSQL databases are non-relational and store data in flexible formats such as documents, key-value pairs, graphs, or wide-column stores. They support dynamic schemas, allowing changes in data structure without affecting existing data. NoSQL databases are designed for horizontal scaling and high performance. Examples include MongoDB and Cassandra.

Thus, SQL is suitable for structured data and complex relationships, while NoSQL is ideal for unstructured or rapidly changing data.

2. CAP Theorem

The CAP theorem states that a distributed system can guarantee only two out of the following three properties: Consistency, Availability, and Partition Tolerance.

Consistency means that all nodes in the system return the same data at the same time. Availability ensures that every request receives a response, even if some nodes are down. Partition tolerance means the system continues to function even when there is a network failure between nodes.

It is not possible to achieve all three properties simultaneously because during a network partition, the system must choose between consistency and availability. If it chooses consistency, it may reject some requests, reducing availability. If it chooses availability, it may return outdated or inconsistent data.

3. Scenarios Where MongoDB is Preferred

MongoDB is preferred in situations where flexibility and scalability are required. First, it is useful when dealing with dynamic or unstructured data, such as user profiles, where different records may have different fields. Second, it is suitable for applications that handle large volumes of data, such as social media platforms, because it supports horizontal scaling. Third, MongoDB is ideal for real-time applications like chat systems and IoT systems, as it provides fast read and write operations.

4. Why MongoDB Uses BSON Instead of JSON

MongoDB uses BSON (Binary JSON) instead of JSON for storing data internally. BSON is a binary format that is more efficient for storage and faster for processing compared to JSON, which is text-based.

BSON supports additional data types such as Date, Binary data, and ObjectId, which are not available in standard JSON. It also allows faster encoding and decoding of data, making database operations more efficient. Therefore, BSON improves performance and flexibility in MongoDB.

5. MongoDB Query

To find all students with a GPA greater than 3.5 and enrolled in “CS101”, the MongoDB query is:

db.students.find({
  GPA: { $gt: 3.5 },
  course: "CS101"
})

If the course field is stored as an array, the query can be written as:

db.students.find({
  GPA: { $gt: 3.5 },
  course: { $in: ["CS101"] }
})